WASHINGTON – Congress will only have three weeks in session to decide on 
the content of the legislation that will regulate the federal government's 
expenses after April 28. It is within this legislation that the Puerto Rican 
authorities will attempt to include the allocation 
that seeks to avoid a fiscal abyss in Puerto Rico's healthcare system.

The hope is that, when the Republican majority in the House of Representatives 
designs this bill—after the blow they were dealt with the defeat of their healthcare 
reform—, they will include at least a temporary extension of a good portion of the 
Medicaid funds granted by Obamacare, which will run out by the end of 2017 or early 
next year.

With or without Obamacare, the healthcare system will no longer have about $1.2 
billion available. The Government of Puerto Rico has stated that it seeks to 
obtain at least an $800-million extension, but other sources acknowledge that 
this allocation could end up being $650 million a year.

"We have to make every effort to try to get included in the expense resolution," 
said yesterday Jaime Plá, executive president of the Hospitals Association and 
healthcare spokesperson within the Private Sector Coalition.

Today, the Republican majority will hold its first group meeting after retracting 
their bill, which favored changes to the healthcare system, and in which the Island 
was never included.

The initial reaction from Ricardo Rosselló's administration has been that the defeat 
of the Republican bill is a positive thing, since it gives more time and leaves 
space for the—albeit slim—possibility of including Puerto Rico in the reform.

A Democrat source in Washington, however, believes that, without the new federal 
healthcare system regulation sought by President Donald Trump and Speaker Paul Ryan, 
allocating Medicaid funds exclusively for Puerto Rico may not be a popular alternative 
for the Republican caucus.

Last week, Sean Duffy (R-Wisconsin)—back when he was still betting on the approval of 
the measure to replace Obamacare—seemed confident that the omnibus spending bill in 
April should be the bill to include an extension of Medicaid funds.

Congress has until April 28th to extend the federal expenses for the 2016-2017 fiscalyear, which ends in September. Due to the Easter recess, the House only has 11 days 
left in session before the end of April. The Senate has 14 days left.

The Island’s authorities hope that other issues will be incorporated into the resolution, 
which would turn the omnibus into a vehicle for a Medicaid allocation.

This way, the future of the Medicaid funds would be known before negotiating the Mi 
Salud contracts and approving the budget.

If the next expense legislation cannot be used, the other option would be the 
reauthorization—by no later than September—of the Children's Health Insurance 
Program (CHIP), a measure that could receive bipartisan support. Resident 
Commissioner Jenniffer González has indicated that they would use "whatever 
legislative mechanism" is available.

After the expense resolution, the next great legislative task for Republicans 
is a tax reform. This is especially important in the Island because of the constant 
search for a new federal incentive for investment in Puerto Rico.

Rodrigo Masses, president of the Puerto Rico Manufacturers Association, asserted 
that it was evident that, after the debate on healthcare, it would be the tax reform's 
turn.

The private sector, he said, would follow the Commissioner’s lead in that process. 
González plans to introduce legislation to establish new incentives for investment 
in Puerto Rico through the so-called economic development zones.

Nevertheless, the manufacturers have not ruled out promoting an initiative to improve 
the treatment of foreign corporations—which are most of the manufacturers in 
Puerto Rico—if an adequate option is not found under the local tax system.
